.TH GNC-TOOLBOX 1 "2026-05-22" "gnc-toolbox 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gnc-toolbox \- import, match, and merge transactions for GnuCash books
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gnc-toolbox
\fBhelp\fR
.br
.B gnc-toolbox
\fBhelp\fR \fIcommand\fR
.br
.B gnc-toolbox
\fBimport\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICSV_FILE\fR
.br
.B gnc-toolbox
\fBmerge\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gnc-toolbox
is a command-line utility for repeatable GnuCash transaction imports.
It reads CSV bank exports, applies parsing and matching rules, and writes
transactions to a GnuCash book. It can also merge missing transactions from
one GnuCash book/account into another book.
.PP
Use dry-run mode while creating or changing rule files, and back up important
GnuCash books before writing changes.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B import
Read transactions from a CSV file and create matching transactions in the
destination GnuCash book.
.TP
.B merge
Copy missing transactions from a source GnuCash book/account into a target
GnuCash book.
.TP
.B help
Show general help or command-specific help.
.SH IMPORT OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b, --book \fIBOOK_REF\fR
Destination GnuCash book path, file URI, or backend URI.
.TP
.B \-c, --config \fIFILE\fR
CSV-like rule file.
.TP
.B \-n, --dry-run
Parse and match transactions without saving changes.
.TP
.B \-D, --no-duplicates
Skip transactions already found in the destination account.
.TP
.B \-v, --verbose
Show progress and summaries.
.TP
.B \-d, --debug
Show detailed parser and matching diagnostics.
.TP
.B \-q, --quiet
Show only errors.
.SH MERGE OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b, --book \fIBOOK_REF\fR
Target GnuCash book.
.TP
.B \-f, --from \fIBOOK_REF\fR
Source GnuCash book.
.TP
.B \-a, --account \fINAME\fR
Source account to merge from.
.TP
.B \-c, --config \fIFILE\fR
CSV-like rule file used for target account, filters, matching, and unmatched routing.
.TP
.B \-n, --dry-run
Preview the merge without saving changes.
.TP
.B \-v, --verbose
Show progress and summaries.
.TP
.B \-d, --debug
Show detailed diagnostics.
.TP
.B \-q, --quiet
Show only errors.
.SH RULE FILES
Rule files are CSV-like text files. Rows appear in this order:
.PP
.nf
optional CSVPARAMS row
zero or more FILTEROUT rows
one base-account row
optional UNMATCHED row
one column-definition row
one or more match rows
.fi
.PP
Use an explicit
.B UNMATCHED
row when transactions without a match rule should still be imported for manual
review in GnuCash.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
gnc-toolbox import bank.csv --book finances.gnucash --config bank-rules.csv --dry-run --verbose
gnc-toolbox import bank.csv --book finances.gnucash --config bank-rules.csv --no-duplicates
gnc-toolbox merge --book current.gnucash --from archive.gnucash --account "Assets:Checking" --config merge-rules.csv --dry-run
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/doc/gnc-toolbox/
Installed documentation, examples, and license text.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gnucash (1)
.PP
Full documentation is available in README.md and USAGE.md.
.SH LICENSE
GNU AGPLv3 or later.
